Considering the case study, CellHeap accesses the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) repository to collect samples 
that meet criteria defined by the Expression Atlas of the European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) 
in https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gxa/sc/help.html} protocol. 
From the SRA toolkit, in https://github.com/ncbi/sra-tools, CellHeap uses four tools to manipulate samples: 
i) vdb-dump to obtain information; ii) prefetch to download the SRA samples; iii) vdb-validate to verify if 
the downloaded samples are consistent; iv) fasterq-dump to convert sra files into fastq files.

The workflow receives as input the bronchoalveolar scRNA-seq dataset PRJNA608742 from the NIH GEO repository,
in https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces/study/?acc=PRJNA608742. This dataset was generated by Liao et al., who 
considered the samples of 12 patients as input data. Three were collected from healthy people (control samples), 
three samples were collected from patients with mild COVID-19 symptoms, and six were from patients with severe 
COVID-19 symptoms. However, after curation and quality control, we process only 11 samples.

We download raw data samples from NCBI Sequence Read Archive (SRA). The vdb-dump, prefetch, and vdb-validate 
tools have sequential implementations and do not offer the possibility of parallelization. 

The fasterq-dump tool produces the input files for Phase 2. It is a multithreaded tool that consumes significant 
temporary disk space in addition to the final output file.
During the fasterq-dump tool execution, we noted the need for at least 13 times the sample size in disk storage 
to guarantee the correct completion of this tool execution. 

Each sample has two read files for paired-end runs. Due to variable input file sizes, Phase 1 processing uses the 
cpu_big_mem queue, which has computing nodes with 768 GB RAM, to guarantee the correct processing of all tasks.

Two scripts are submitted to run this phase: one to download the input data (vdb-dump, prefetch, and vdb-validate 
tools) sequentially, and the other (multithreaded) to generate the fastq input files for Phase 2 (fasterq-dump tool).
